# Html Overview and Index

## What is Html and how does it work

Hyper text Markup Language or "HTML" is a special way of writing a text document that allows a web-browser to display its contents in a specfied way. Much like a translator and a blueprint all wrapped up into one. Like any language weather spoken or programming, HTML has a specific syntax that it follows; You can think of "Syntax" as Grammar Rules. Some rules are general some are specific, it is important to note that the browser reads HTML from an "outside-in" perspective, the order in which a browser (and this is true of all programs regardless of the language used to write them) renders HTML is referred to as ***Scope*** you will find it helpful to remember this when trying to figure out why something is not working the way you anticipated. 

The way we tell a browser to use HTML as the interface is the use of ***Tags***. A tag is indicated by a pair of chevrons `< >` or greater-than/less-than signs and between them is the label of the tag (*also called an "element*) we are using. the first tag of any webpage is the one that tells the browser "hey this is an html document" 
`<html> *the content of the webpage goes here, this includes other tags to describe page layout, style, etc* </html>` I will not list all of the tags here as there are already a number of resources available for that and they will be noted as they are used in the rest of this section; it is important to note that the tag pairs have an open: `<*element/tag name>` and a close: `</*element/tag name*>`  indicated by the forward slash inside the chevrons but before the element name. **everything between the open and closing tags will take on the _attributes_ of that tag unless otherwise specified**

There are two more important tags/elements to note here as they form the basic structure or skeleton of the webpage, the other tags are like the muscles and organs. The first tag that goes inside the html element is the `<head>*content of head goes here*</head>` the ***Head*** is very much like the skull it holds the brains of the page which are defined by other tags, to continue with the biology analogy. The head outlines things like what type of characters to render the page with, the name of the page, and other *meta-data* that the user will not see when they pull up the page. The next element inside the html tag is the `<Body>` tag (*moving forward we will reference tags only with their open sign. it is to be assumed that the appropriate closing sign applies unless otherwise specified*) this is what the user sees, it contains all the different pieces of the webpage that you interact with in the browser like muscles and organs of a physical body. **do not put this element inside the head, only inside the html tags.

The next section will cover some more specific information related to the `<head>` section but I wanted to note a couple of things as they will be important when we do an overview of page layout later. In regards to the `<body>` there are several elements that make it up like headers: `<h1><h2>` and paragraphs: `<p>`; there are many other elements that help give structure and shape to these but as mentioned before, there are other resources like the books on front-end development by ***Jon Duckett*** which is the primary reference for these notes. Finally, thinking of elements the same way we think of parnethesis `()` in algebra when determining the Order of Operations can help you determine which elements you need and how they need to be nested in order to display in the way that you want them to. 

## Breif Summary of special elements and Attributes.

All elements of an html document have attributes, atributes are the adjectives of html and describe things *about* the element. Browsers render all elements with a set of default attributes but these can be altered within your document. Attributes are declared and then given a value *inside the opening tag of an element* for example, if I want a specific paragraph to be a color other than "black" I would tell the page to alter the default attribute "black" by adding ` font-color: yellow;` inside the angle-brackets of the opening tag. `<p font-color:yellow;>*paragraph content*</p>` only this specific element will take on this attribute, all other <p>elements will be default unless otherwise specified. we'll talk more about how to style a page and diffrentiate elements with attributes when we talk about CSS or "Cascading Style Sheets" 

Now that we've talked about attributes let's touch on a couple of special elements. `*<!DOCTYPE>*` goes in the `<head>` element and tells the browser which version of html to use when rendering the page. `<section>, <article>, <div>, and <span>` all let you group other elements in specific ways to allow you greater control over how the page renders. `<iframe>` allows you to embed a section of another website into your webpage. 

Because we have to describe every little detail of how we want the page to look, the code that goes into creating a page can get really complex and overtime you will forget why you had something designed a certain way. For this reason we can add comments to html that will not show up when the page is rendered but will be available when we go into the page source document to make changes. we add a comment in html like so: `<!--comment goes here -->`. which brings me to the last thing I wanted to mention before moving to layout process and design; Escape characters. Escape characters are used because there are times that we want a special character to actually be rendered on the page, but since it is a part of the programming language the browser needs a way to know that it's not supposed to render the character as it normally would, kind of like an aside in a play. Each character that is reserved by html code can be escaped with it's own code. as there are many, I will not list them all, there is plenty of documentation for that but as an example, to actually render an angle brackett or cheveron I would use `&lt;` for and "less-than" or `&gt;` for "greater-than". 

For greater detail on more specific Html topics and references, use the index below


### Index of Specific HTML topics
<!--add linked pages as this developes-->

links will be added as the course continues 